# United-States-Third-System-Forts-Bivariate-Map
The code in this repository shows the Third System forts along the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico in the US and has a choropleth map showing the how many Third System forts each state on the East Coast has. The icons are also styled after a chess rook piece and are colored based on the region along the East Coast each fort resides in.

Background:

The Third System of coastal defense forts in the United States lasted between 1816 and 1867. This project existed as a military defensive measure taken by the country after the War of 1812 and the United Kingdom's invasion of the East Coast and the subsequent burning of Washington, D.C. Almost all of the forts in this system are still standing today and many are accessible and open to the public all along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. These forts are all exemplary examples of stone and brick masonry, with millions of bricks being laid for each fort in often times several-feet-thick walls. The great majority of these forts feature the cutting-edge military innovation of the time, casemates. These building techniques hid cannons, often times in multiple tiers, under cover with embrasures so that the artillery crews were still able to fire upon passing ships or amphibious forces without being exposed to enemy fire themselves. Each fort has its own unique arrangement of cannon placements based on the landscape, and all have different accessory feature based on the location of the fort and its landscape. The forts are all strategically positioned near bottlenecks in the form of rock-bounded narrows in the northern states to sandy inlets in the southern states. These forts protected coastal harbors that would cripple any American war effort, should they be taken, and provided crucial downriver defense for some cities located further upstream but still vulnerable to naval attacks. Some coastal harbors include Boston, New York, Charleston, Savannah, Pensacola, and New Orleans. I personally find these forts very interesting to visit and explore, as it is very easy to grasp for me the forgotten importance these forts held, as the stark sentinels rising out of the coast, forewarning any further British invasion of the difficulties it would face, to the last stands these forts faced of Confederate and Union forces during the Civil War, as both sides attacked and defended these forts. Some of these forts even stood as watchposts during the Second World War to scan the horizons for German U-Boats crossing the Atlantic to surprise and sink Allied merchant vessels. As of April 2025, I have had the privilege of visiting several of the forts, including forts Macon and Caswell in North Carolina, Fort Sumter in South Carolina, Fort Pulaski in Georgia, and Fort Knox in Maine. Each of these forts is a sight to behold in and of itself, but they become all the more amazing when you consider the historical implications and context of each fort, when warfare and the United States' standing in the world was far different than it is today. Each fort open to the public is administered by county and state park agencies, as well as some by the National Park Service as National Monuments or Battlefields. 

Technical Code Details:

Within my code, I used the Font Awesome service to assign each of my geojson points to show a chess rook icon, which I felt was the most appropriate icon for these places. I was able to also assign each icon a color based on the region I assigned to each point; assigning them values such as "New England", "Upper South", and "Gulf Coast". I also implemented a chropleth map using a 'reds' scale to illustrate the concentrations of the forts by the state they reside in. From the map, you can see that the states with important harbors and rivers to protect have the greater concentration of forts. I also attached a legend to detail the meaning of the choropleth values and the region each icon color designates. Finally, I was able to deliberately choose a sattelite basemap with a resolution high enough that allows the user to zoom all the way in on the points and be able to see the profiles of each fort's walls and get an idea of the immense scale of these fortifications and how each of them effectively covers their specific waterway either by itself or in conjunction with other fortifications. 

Further Improvements:

To build further upon this project, I would like to insert more information in my dialog boxes, such as pictures of the forts and/or hyperlinks to their Wikipedia entries and park agency websites on the forts. Also, there are more Third System forts on the Great Lakes and even in San Francisco Bay, of which Fort Point and the original fort on Alcatraz Island are a part of. I would also use cone polygons or lines to illustrate the firing arcs and sightlines of the cannons on the forts, like one would often see on the maps on signs and kiosks at the forts in person, as well. Finally, I would even like to use my code to illustrate some of the notable events that occurred at some of the forts, such as the siege of Fort Sumter in 1861. 
